README.md, before:

# Purify: A provably-secure PRF with low multiplicative complexity

A [pseudorandom function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandom_function_family) is a function that
takes as input a key and a message, and to anyone who does not know the key, the function is indistinguishable
from random.

For certain applications a PRF is needed that can cheaply be verified in an arithmetic circuit.
One example is when a zero-knowledge proof for the correct evaluation of the function is wanted.
In such circuits, cost is typically dominated by the number of multiplications in
the circuit. This leads to an unusual cost metric for various algorithms.
As a result, schemes that are optimized for execution on real hardware
are often far from optimal inside proofs.

Purify is a PRF onto the inputs modulo an *L*-bit prime *P* that is optimized for low multiplicative complexity. It has the following properties:
* Purify is **provably** indistinguishable from random at a security level of approximately *L/2* bits, assuming elliptic curves with certain properties over *GF(P)* can be found.
* For a given message, an arithmetic circuit over *GF(P)* can verify a Purify evaluation using less than *16L/3* multiplication gates.
* If in addition to evaluation of the PRF also verification of a (publicly known) commitment to the key is needed, a combined circuit with less than *8L* gates is possible. It can be shown that Purify remains indistinguishable from random to an attacker who knows this commitment to the key.

The last property is useful in the context of proving that deterministic nonces in multiparty Schnorr schemes were correctly evaluated. In an upcoming paper,
we will show that this construction is secure in that context.

Hash functions are typically expensive inside arithmetic circuits. While Purify does rely on a hash function, it only hashes the messages, not the key.
This means that proofs in which the message is public, the hash function can be evaluated outside of the circuit.
Because of this the multiplicative complexity can be kept relatively low without giving up provable security.

Our proofs model the hash functions as random oracles, and assume elliptic curves are used in which the decisional Diffie-Hellman problem is hard.

## Parameters

* Let *P* be an *L*-bit prime.
* Let *D* be a non-square in *GF(P)*.
* Let *A* and *B* be elements of *GF(P)* such that:
  * The elliptic curve *E<sub>1</sub>* over *GF(P)* with equation *y<sup>2</sup> = x<sup>3</sup> + Ax + B* has prime order *N<sub>1</sub>*.
  * The elliptic curve *E<sub>2</sub>* over *GF(P)* with equation *y<sup>2</sup> = x<sup>3</sup> + AD<sup>2</sup>x + D<sup>3</sup>B* has prime order *N<sub>2</sub>*.
  * The ECDDH problem is assumed to be hard in both *E<sub>1</sub>* and *E<sub>2</sub>*.
* Let *H<sub>1</sub>* be a hash function onto *E<sub>1</sub>* excluding the point at infinity.
* Let *H<sub>2</sub>* be a hash function onto *E<sub>2</sub>* excluding the point at infinity.
* Let *G<sub>1</sub>* be a generator for *E<sub>1</sub>*.
* Let *G<sub>2</sub>* be a generator for *E<sub>2</sub>*.

The tool <code>gen_params.sage</code> can be used to find appropriate values for *A*, *B*, *D*, *N<sub>1</sub>*, and *N<sub>2</sub>* for a given *P*, for example:

    $ sage gen_params.sage 1000000007
    P = 1000000007 # Field size
    A = 17 # curve equation parameter A
    B = 13 # curve equation parameter B
    D = 5 # non-square in GF(P)
    N1 = 999956519 # Order of E1: y^2 = x^3 + A*x + B over GF(P)
    N2 = 1000043497 # Order of E2: y^2 = x^3 + A*D^2*x + B*D^3 over GF(P)
    # E1 = (N1 - 1) / 1 # Embedding degree of E1
    # E2 = (N2 - 1) / 3 # Embedding degree of E2

For values of P that are sufficiently large for cryptographic purposes (256 bits and larger), this
may take several days. For primes equal to common group orders, see the Example Parameters section below.

## Keys

(Private) keys for Purify are tuples *(z<sub>1</sub>, z<sub>2</sub>)*, where *z<sub>1</sub>* is a non-zero integer below *(N<sub>1</sub> + 1) / 2* and
*z<sub>2</sub>* is a non-zero integer below *(N<sub>2</sub> + 1) / 2*. They can be represented as a single integer *z = z<sub>1</sub> - 1 + (z<sub>2</sub> - 1)(N<sub>1</sub> - 1) / 2*.

The corresponding public keys (if desired) are tuples *(x<sub>1</sub>, x<sub>2</sub>)*, where *x<sub>1</sub>* is the X coordinate of *z<sub>1</sub>G<sub>1</sub>* and
*x<sub>2</sub>* is the X coordinate of *z<sub>2</sub>G<sub>2</sub>*. They can be represented as a single integer *x = x<sub>1</sub> + P x<sub>2</sub>*.

The <code>purify.py</code> tool can be used to compute these. **Note that this code is purely for demonstration purposes.**

    $ ./purify.py gen
    z=11427c7268288dddf0cd24af3d30524fd817a91e103e7e02eb28b78db81cb350b3d2562f45fa8ecd711d1becc02fa348cf2187429228e7aac6644a3da2824e93 # private key
    x=9343f981e9c40546061e63f9f4e6f61541c483c8aae8fe27180c490f0faf584d5036a5952b01200d8b0fdb49c83d5f8dcc8ae434e77785c576720d18897bbea5 # public key

## Formula

For a message *m* and key *(z<sub>1</sub>, z<sub>2</sub>)*, *Purify((z<sub>1</sub>, z<sub>2</sub>), m)* can be computed as follows:
* Let *u* be the X coordinate of *z<sub>1</sub>H<sub>1</sub>(m)*.
* Let *v* be the X coordinate of *z<sub>2</sub>H<sub>2</sub>(m)*.
* Return *((u + v / D)(A + u v / D) + 2B) / (u - v / D)<sup>2</sup>*.

The <code>purify.py</code> tool implements this:

    $ ./purify.py eval 01234567 11427c7268288dddf0cd24af3d30524fd817a91e103e7e02eb28b78db81cb350b3d2562f45fa8ecd711d1becc02fa348cf2187429228e7aac6644a3da2824e93
    eval: afae82108c66397451ce376bc95751c398e40eaf8c768d1b18cc9dd4161cee35

## Verification using arithmetic circuits

The <code>purify.py</code> can also construct arithmetic circuits that verify the Purify evaluation as well as correctness of public keys. Specifically:

    $ ./purify.py verifier 01234567 9343f981e9c40546061e63f9f4e6f61541c483c8aae8fe27180c490f0faf584d5036a5952b01200d8b0fdb49c83d5f8dcc8ae434e77785c576720d18897bbea5 >verifier.py

This generates a Python function <code>verifier(pubkey, output, v)</code> that takes as input the *x* value from above, the output from the evaluation, and
an assignment for all of the circuit's secret variables. It is specific for the message <code>01234567</code> in this case.
The function simply contains a number of assert statements that each verify a relation that must hold between these values.

Input for the verifier can be generated using:

    $ ./purify.py prove 01234567 11427c7268288dddf0cd24af3d30524fd817a91e103e7e02eb28b78db81cb350b3d2562f45fa8ecd711d1becc02fa348cf2187429228e7aac6644a3da2824e93 >proof.py

It invokes the verifier with expected values:

    $ cat proof.py | cut -d , -f 1-2
    verify(0x9343f981e9c40546061e63f9f4e6f61541c483c8aae8fe27180c490f0faf584d5036a5952b01200d8b0fdb49c83d5f8dcc8ae434e77785c576720d18897bbea5, 0xafae82108c66397451ce376bc95751c398e40eaf8c768d1b18cc9dd4161cee35

These are indeed the public key and the evaluation. The third argument to <code>verifier</code> is a long list of secret variables. The proof can be verified too:

    $ cat verifier.py proof.py | python3

**Note that this does not actually implement any zero-knowledge proofs. It only derives the relations that would need to be proven, and the secret values they're over in specific instances.**

Alternatively, by adding the <code>--bulletproofs-outfile</code> flag to the <code>prove</code> and <code>verifier</code> commands, the output is a format that can be used in the [libsecp256k1-zkp](https://github.com/ElementsProject/secp256k1-zkp/pull/16) bulletproofs module (see https://github.com/jonasnick/secp256k1-zkp/tree/bulletproof-musig-dn for benchmarking purify with bulletproofs).

## Example parameters

The code in this repository has parameters that correspond to the order of the secp256k1 group:

    P = 115792089237316195423570985008687907852837564279074904382605163141518161494337
    A = 118
    B = 339
    D = 5
    N1 = 115792089237316195423570985008687907853146579067639158218940405176378157516777
    N2 = 115792089237316195423570985008687907852528549490510650546269921106658165471899

Using this 256-bit prime results in verification circuits that have 2030 multiplication gates.

Other target groups can be configured by modifying purify.py. Other parameters are available in comments:

    # Parameters generated using gen_params.sage for Curve25519 (253 bits)
    P = 0x1000000000000000000000000000000014DEF9DEA2F79CD65812631A5CF5D3ED
    A = 95
    B = 78
    D = 2
    N1 = 0x100000000000000000000000000000004E9C306B81CF1C611587B3ED91288DAD
    N2 = 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFDB21C351C4201D4B9A9D124728C31A2F

    # Parameters generated using gen_params.sage for BLS12-381 (255 bits)
    P = 0x73EDA753299D7D483339D80809A1D80553BDA402FFFE5BFEFFFFFFFF00000001
    A = 245
    B = 46
    D = 5
    N1 = 0x73EDA753299D7D483339D80809A1D804942105BA15136AAC92458EF0CDB43949
    N2 = 0x73EDA753299D7D483339D80809A1D806135A424BEAE94D516DBA710D324BC6BB

    # Parameters generated using gen_params.sage for BN(2,254) (254 bits)
    P = 0x2523648240000001BA344D8000000007FF9F800000000010A10000000000000D
    A = 209
    B = 140
    D = 2
    N1 = 0x2523648240000001BA344D80000000089C9DDF8B4198211E1005BEF4E673BA39
    N2 = 0x2523648240000001BA344D800000000762A12074BE67DF0331FA410B198C45E3

    # Parameters generated using gen_params.sage for Ed448-Goldilocks (446 bits)
    P = 0x3FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF7CCA23E9C44EDB49AED63690216CC2728DC58F552378C292AB5844F3
    A = 155
    B = 199
    D = 2
    N1 = 0x3FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF61E19CF8AE93A7F6204DD85972E93B7A4C4733D057799E70F578D05B
    N2 = 0x3FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF97B2AADADA0A0E9D3D5E94C6CFF0496ACF43EAD9EF77E6B46137B98D

Commit message:

Optionally output circuit to solve with Z3 theorem prover

README.md, after:

# Purify: A provably-secure PRF with low multiplicative complexity

A [pseudorandom function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandom_function_family) is a function that
takes as input a key and a message, and to anyone who does not know the key, the function is indistinguishable
from random.

For certain applications a PRF is needed that can cheaply be verified in an arithmetic circuit.
One example is when a zero-knowledge proof for the correct evaluation of the function is wanted.
In such circuits, cost is typically dominated by the number of multiplications in
the circuit. This leads to an unusual cost metric for various algorithms.
As a result, schemes that are optimized for execution on real hardware
are often far from optimal inside proofs.

Purify is a PRF onto the inputs modulo an *L*-bit prime *P* that is optimized for low multiplicative complexity. It has the following properties:
* Purify is **provably** indistinguishable from random at a security level of approximately *L/2* bits, assuming elliptic curves with certain properties over *GF(P)* can be found.
* For a given message, an arithmetic circuit over *GF(P)* can verify a Purify evaluation using less than *16L/3* multiplication gates.
* If in addition to evaluation of the PRF also verification of a (publicly known) commitment to the key is needed, a combined circuit with less than *8L* gates is possible. It can be shown that Purify remains indistinguishable from random to an attacker who knows this commitment to the key.

The last property is useful in the context of proving that deterministic nonces in multiparty Schnorr schemes were correctly evaluated. In an upcoming paper,
we will show that this construction is secure in that context.

Hash functions are typically expensive inside arithmetic circuits. While Purify does rely on a hash function, it only hashes the messages, not the key.
This means that proofs in which the message is public, the hash function can be evaluated outside of the circuit.
Because of this the multiplicative complexity can be kept relatively low without giving up provable security.

Our proofs model the hash functions as random oracles, and assume elliptic curves are used in which the decisional Diffie-Hellman problem is hard.

## Parameters

* Let *P* be an *L*-bit prime.
* Let *D* be a non-square in *GF(P)*.
* Let *A* and *B* be elements of *GF(P)* such that:
  * The elliptic curve *E<sub>1</sub>* over *GF(P)* with equation *y<sup>2</sup> = x<sup>3</sup> + Ax + B* has prime order *N<sub>1</sub>*.
  * The elliptic curve *E<sub>2</sub>* over *GF(P)* with equation *y<sup>2</sup> = x<sup>3</sup> + AD<sup>2</sup>x + D<sup>3</sup>B* has prime order *N<sub>2</sub>*.
  * The ECDDH problem is assumed to be hard in both *E<sub>1</sub>* and *E<sub>2</sub>*.
* Let *H<sub>1</sub>* be a hash function onto *E<sub>1</sub>* excluding the point at infinity.
* Let *H<sub>2</sub>* be a hash function onto *E<sub>2</sub>* excluding the point at infinity.
* Let *G<sub>1</sub>* be a generator for *E<sub>1</sub>*.
* Let *G<sub>2</sub>* be a generator for *E<sub>2</sub>*.

The tool <code>gen_params.sage</code> can be used to find appropriate values for *A*, *B*, *D*, *N<sub>1</sub>*, and *N<sub>2</sub>* for a given *P*, for example:

    $ sage gen_params.sage 1000000007
    P = 1000000007 # Field size
    A = 17 # curve equation parameter A
    B = 13 # curve equation parameter B
    D = 5 # non-square in GF(P)
    N1 = 999956519 # Order of E1: y^2 = x^3 + A*x + B over GF(P)
    N2 = 1000043497 # Order of E2: y^2 = x^3 + A*D^2*x + B*D^3 over GF(P)
    # E1 = (N1 - 1) / 1 # Embedding degree of E1
    # E2 = (N2 - 1) / 3 # Embedding degree of E2

For values of P that are sufficiently large for cryptographic purposes (256 bits and larger), this
may take several days. For primes equal to common group orders, see the Example Parameters section below.

## Keys

(Private) keys for Purify are tuples *(z<sub>1</sub>, z<sub>2</sub>)*, where *z<sub>1</sub>* is a non-zero integer below *(N<sub>1</sub> + 1) / 2* and
*z<sub>2</sub>* is a non-zero integer below *(N<sub>2</sub> + 1) / 2*. They can be represented as a single integer *z = z<sub>1</sub> - 1 + (z<sub>2</sub> - 1)(N<sub>1</sub> - 1) / 2*.

The corresponding public keys (if desired) are tuples *(x<sub>1</sub>, x<sub>2</sub>)*, where *x<sub>1</sub>* is the X coordinate of *z<sub>1</sub>G<sub>1</sub>* and
*x<sub>2</sub>* is the X coordinate of *z<sub>2</sub>G<sub>2</sub>*. They can be represented as a single integer *x = x<sub>1</sub> + P x<sub>2</sub>*.

The <code>purify.py</code> tool can be used to compute these. **Note that this code is purely for demonstration purposes.**

    $ ./purify.py gen
    z=11427c7268288dddf0cd24af3d30524fd817a91e103e7e02eb28b78db81cb350b3d2562f45fa8ecd711d1becc02fa348cf2187429228e7aac6644a3da2824e93 # private key
    x=9343f981e9c40546061e63f9f4e6f61541c483c8aae8fe27180c490f0faf584d5036a5952b01200d8b0fdb49c83d5f8dcc8ae434e77785c576720d18897bbea5 # public key

## Formula

For a message *m* and key *(z<sub>1</sub>, z<sub>2</sub>)*, *Purify((z<sub>1</sub>, z<sub>2</sub>), m)* can be computed as follows:
* Let *u* be the X coordinate of *z<sub>1</sub>H<sub>1</sub>(m)*.
* Let *v* be the X coordinate of *z<sub>2</sub>H<sub>2</sub>(m)*.
* Return *((u + v / D)(A + u v / D) + 2B) / (u - v / D)<sup>2</sup>*.

The <code>purify.py</code> tool implements this:

    $ ./purify.py eval 01234567 11427c7268288dddf0cd24af3d30524fd817a91e103e7e02eb28b78db81cb350b3d2562f45fa8ecd711d1becc02fa348cf2187429228e7aac6644a3da2824e93
    eval: afae82108c66397451ce376bc95751c398e40eaf8c768d1b18cc9dd4161cee35

## Verification using arithmetic circuits

The <code>purify.py</code> can also construct arithmetic circuits that verify the Purify evaluation as well as correctness of public keys. Specifically:

    $ ./purify.py verifier 01234567 9343f981e9c40546061e63f9f4e6f61541c483c8aae8fe27180c490f0faf584d5036a5952b01200d8b0fdb49c83d5f8dcc8ae434e77785c576720d18897bbea5 >verifier.py

This generates a Python function <code>verifier(pubkey, output, v)</code> that takes as input the *x* value from above, the output from the evaluation, and
an assignment for all of the circuit's secret variables. It is specific for the message <code>01234567</code> in this case.
The function simply contains a number of assert statements that each verify a relation that must hold between these values.

Input for the verifier can be generated using:

    $ ./purify.py prove 01234567 11427c7268288dddf0cd24af3d30524fd817a91e103e7e02eb28b78db81cb350b3d2562f45fa8ecd711d1becc02fa348cf2187429228e7aac6644a3da2824e93 >proof.py

It invokes the verifier with expected values:

    $ cat proof.py | cut -d , -f 1-2
    verify(0x9343f981e9c40546061e63f9f4e6f61541c483c8aae8fe27180c490f0faf584d5036a5952b01200d8b0fdb49c83d5f8dcc8ae434e77785c576720d18897bbea5, 0xafae82108c66397451ce376bc95751c398e40eaf8c768d1b18cc9dd4161cee35

These are indeed the public key and the evaluation. The third argument to <code>verifier</code> is a long list of secret variables. The proof can be verified too:

    $ cat verifier.py proof.py | python3

**Note that this does not actually implement any zero-knowledge proofs. It only derives the relations that would need to be proven, and the secret values they're over in specific instances.**

Alternatively, by adding the <code>--bulletproofs-outfile</code> flag to the <code>prove</code> and <code>verifier</code> commands, the output is a format that can be used in the [libsecp256k1-zkp](https://github.com/ElementsProject/secp256k1-zkp/pull/16) bulletproofs module (see https://github.com/jonasnick/secp256k1-zkp/tree/bulletproof-musig-dn for benchmarking purify with bulletproofs).

With the <code>verifier</code> command and the <code>--z3</code> flag the output is a python program that that uses the [Z3 theorem prover](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3) to solve the circuit. Given enough time and memory, this can be used to falsify the hypothesis that purify is secure.

## Example parameters

The code in this repository has parameters that correspond to the order of the secp256k1 group:

    P = 115792089237316195423570985008687907852837564279074904382605163141518161494337
    A = 118
    B = 339
    D = 5
    N1 = 115792089237316195423570985008687907853146579067639158218940405176378157516777
    N2 = 115792089237316195423570985008687907852528549490510650546269921106658165471899

Using this 256-bit prime results in verification circuits that have 2030 multiplication gates.

Other target groups can be configured by modifying purify.py. Other parameters are available in comments:

    # Parameters generated using gen_params.sage for Curve25519 (253 bits)
    P = 0x1000000000000000000000000000000014DEF9DEA2F79CD65812631A5CF5D3ED
    A = 95
    B = 78
    D = 2
    N1 = 0x100000000000000000000000000000004E9C306B81CF1C611587B3ED91288DAD
    N2 = 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFDB21C351C4201D4B9A9D124728C31A2F

    # Parameters generated using gen_params.sage for BLS12-381 (255 bits)
    P = 0x73EDA753299D7D483339D80809A1D80553BDA402FFFE5BFEFFFFFFFF00000001
    A = 245
    B = 46
    D = 5
    N1 = 0x73EDA753299D7D483339D80809A1D804942105BA15136AAC92458EF0CDB43949
    N2 = 0x73EDA753299D7D483339D80809A1D806135A424BEAE94D516DBA710D324BC6BB

    # Parameters generated using gen_params.sage for BN(2,254) (254 bits)
    P = 0x2523648240000001BA344D8000000007FF9F800000000010A10000000000000D
    A = 209
    B = 140
    D = 2
    N1 = 0x2523648240000001BA344D80000000089C9DDF8B4198211E1005BEF4E673BA39
    N2 = 0x2523648240000001BA344D800000000762A12074BE67DF0331FA410B198C45E3

    # Parameters generated using gen_params.sage for Ed448-Goldilocks (446 bits)
    P = 0x3FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF7CCA23E9C44EDB49AED63690216CC2728DC58F552378C292AB5844F3
    A = 155
    B = 199
    D = 2
    N1 = 0x3FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF61E19CF8AE93A7F6204DD85972E93B7A4C4733D057799E70F578D05B
    N2 = 0x3FFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF97B2AADADA0A0E9D3D5E94C6CFF0496ACF43EAD9EF77E6B46137B98D
